# Encoding with *x265*

*High Efficiency Video Coding* (*HEVC*),
also known as *H.265* and *MPEG-H Part 2*,
is a video compression standard designed
as part of the MPEG-H project
as a successor to the widely used Advanced Video Coding
(*AVC*, *H.264*, or *MPEG-4 Part 10*).
Comparing with *H.264*,
*HEVC* offers up to 50% better data compression
at the same level of video quality,
or substantially improved video quality
at the same bit rate.
By 2017,
most high-end smartphones and many mid-range devices
had *HEVC* decoding capabilities built in,
making it easier to play *HEVC* videos
on a variety of devices.

*x265* is an open-source software for encoding video in *HEVC*.
Because of its better 10-bit color depth support,
support for multiple *HDR* formats,
and higher data compression rate compared to *x264*,
*x265* has become the mainstream encoding tool for fansubbers.


## Prerequisites

To get started, you'll need two things:

- A video to encode—for the examples,
  we will pipe in a video from VapourSynth,
  which you should be able to do
  if you've been following the previous sections of this guide
- The *x265* encoder

Well, it’s worth mentioning
that there’re several modified versions of *x265*
specifically improved for animation encoding.

- [Asuna](https://github.com/msg7086/x265-Yuuki-Asuna/tree/Asuna)
- [Yuuki](https://github.com/msg7086/x265-Yuuki-Asuna/tree/Yuuki)
- [AmusementClub](https://github.com/AmusementClub/x265)

These modifications may include
some custom features and performance optimizations.
They might also include several tune presets.

Since there is no official build of *x265*,
it is highly recommended to download [HandBrake](https://handbrake.fr/),
which is an open-source video transcoder
with several built-in codecs
and an easy-to-use user interface.

If you want to build your own standalone *x265*,
check [the official git repository](https://bitbucket.org/multicoreware/x265_git/src/master/),
all build scripts are provided.
For those modified versions,
please check their own sites.


## Getting Started

**The following contents assumes
you already have a standalone build of *x265*,
and already added it into your system PATH.**

Like *x264*,
*x265* is also very configurable,
and the options may seem overwhelming too.
But you can get started encoding
by using the presets *x265* provides
and understanding a few basic concepts.
Check [here](https://x265.readthedocs.io/en/stable/cli.html) for full cli options.

We’ll walk through those concepts with the following examples.


### Example 1: General-Purpose Encoding

Open up a terminal window,
and navigate to the folder
where your VapourSynth script lives.
Let's run the following command:

```sh
vspipe --y4m myvideo.vpy - | x265 --y4m --profile main10 --preset veryfast --tune animation --crf 20 -o x265output.mkv -
```

Let's run through what each of these options means:


#### `vspipe --y4m myvideo.vpy -`

This portion loads your VapourSynth script
and pipes it to stdout,
adding y4m headers that *x265* can decode.
If you use Linux,
you're probably familiar with how piping works.
If you're not,
it's basically a way of chaining two commands together.
In this case, we want to chain `vspipe`,
the program that reads VapourSynth scripts,
with `x265`, our encoder.


#### `--y4m`

This tells *x265* that we're providing it with a y4m(YUV4MPEG2) file.
This matches up with the `--y4m` flag
that we gave to the `vspipe` command.


#### `--profile main10`

Enforce the requirements of the specified profile,
ensuring the output stream will be decodable
by a decoder which supports that profile.

The following profiles are supported in *x265*.

8bit profiles:

```
* main, main-intra, mainstillpicture (or msp for short)
* main444-8, main444-intra, main444-stillpicture
```

10bit profiles:

```
* main10, main10-intra
* main422-10, main422-10-intra
* main444-10, main444-10-intra
```

12bit profiles:

```
* main12, main12-intra
* main422-12, main422-12-intra
* main444-12, main444-12-intra
```

Intra means intra-frame coding,
which is a data compression technique
that predicts the values of a particular frame
based on the values of the same frame.


#### `--preset veryfast`

*x265* has a set of presets
to switch between faster encoding, or higher quality.
The full list of presets, from fastest to slowest, is:

1. ultrafast
1. superfast
1. veryfast
1. faster
1. fast
1. medium (default)
1. slow
1. slower
1. veryslow
1. placebo

Different presets determine different parameters.
Check [the official doc](https://x265.readthedocs.io/en/stable/presets.html#presets) for detailed information.

You will almost never want to use the extreme settings,
but generally, if you want good quality
and don't care about how long the encode takes,
`slower` or `veryslow` are recommended.
In this example,
because we are just demonstrating how *x265* works,
we want a fast encode
and have chosen `veryfast`.


#### `--tune animation`

Beyond the preset chosen,
*x265* allows us to further tune the encoding settings
for the type of content we're working with.
The following tunings are generally the most useful:

- `film`: Recommended for live action videos.
- `animation`: Recommended for anime or cartoons with flat textures.
  For 3D animation (e.g. Pixar movies),
  you may find better results with `film`.

You don't need to use a tuning,
but it generally helps to produce a better-looking video.


#### `--crf 20`

CRF is a constant-quality, 1-pass encoding mode.
In layman's terms,
this means that we don't need the output to meet a specific filesize,
we just want the output to meet a certain quality level.
CRF ranges from 0 to 51,
with 0 being the best quality(lossless)
and 51 being the smallest filesize,
but there is a certain range of CRF settings
that are generally most useful.
For high quality anime encoding,
at least `18.0` is recommended.


#### `-o x265output.mkv -`

This last portion tells which files to use for the input and output.
We use `-o` to tell which filename
to write the encoded file to.
In this case,
*x265* will write a file at `x265output.mkv`
in the current directory.

The last argument we are passing to *x265* is the input file.
In this case,
we pass `-` for the input file,
which tells *x265* to use the piped output from vspipe.
The input argument is the only positional argument,
so it does not need to be last;
*x265* will recognize it
as the only argument without a `--` flag before it.


### Example 2: Targeted File Size

For the next example,
let's say we want to make sure our encode fits onto a single 4.7GB DVD[^1].
How would we do that in *x265*?

First, we'll need to figure out
what bitrate our encode should be, in **kilobits per second**.
Everything you need to know
is listed in [the *x264* documentation](./x264.md#example-2-targeted-file-size).

And here's how we could add that to our *x265* command:

```sh
vspipe --y4m myvideo.vpy - | x265 --y4m --preset veryfast --bitrate 5222 -o x265output.mkv -
```

The `--bitrate` option, by itself,
says that we want to do a 1-pass, average-bitrate encode.
In other words,
the encoder will still give more bits to sections of the video
that have more detail or motion,
but the average bitrate of the video will be close to what we requested.


### Example 3: 2-Pass Encoding

So far, we've only done 1-pass encodes.
While using CRF 1-pass is great
when you don't have a target bitrate,
it's recommended not to use 1-pass for **targeted-bitrate** encodes,
because the encoder can't know what's coming
ahead of the current section of video.
This means it can't make good decisions
about what parts of the video need the most bitrate.

How do we fix this?
*x265* supports what is known as 2-pass encoding.
In 2-pass mode,
*x265* runs through the video twice,
the first time analyzing it
to determine where to place keyframes
and which sections of video need the most bitrate,
and the second time performing the actual encode.
2-pass mode is highly recommended
if you need to target a certain bitrate.

Here's how we would run our first pass:

```sh
vspipe --y4m myvideo.vpy - | x265 --y4m --preset veryfast --pass 1 --bitrate 5222 -o x265output.mkv -
```

This creates a stats file in our current directory,
which *x265* will use in the second pass:

```sh
vspipe --y4m myvideo.vpy - | x265 --y4m --preset veryfast --pass 2 --bitrate 5222 -o x265output.mkv -
```

You'll notice all we had to change was `--pass 1` to `--pass 2`.
Simple!

Although *x265* will automatically use faster settings for the first pass,
it should be no surprise
that 2-pass encoding is slower than 1-pass encoding.
Therefore,
there are still certain use cases where 1-pass,
bitrate-targeted video is a good fit,
such as streaming.


### Recap

We covered the basics of how to encode in *x265*,
including speed presets,
tunings,
and three different encoding modes.

Here is a summary of when to use each encoding mode:

- 1-pass Constant Quality (CRF):
  - Good for: General-purpose encoding
  - Bad for: Streaming; obtaining a certain file size
- 1-pass Average Bitrate:
  - Good for: Streaming
  - Bad for: Everything else
- 2-pass Average Bitrate:
  - Good for: Obtaining a certain file size
  - Bad for: Streaming


## Advanced Configuration

Coming Sooooooooooooooooooon

---

[^1]: Source: <http://www.mpeg.org/MPEG/DVD/Book_A/Specs.html>
